src/en/06_1_unsafe_generalities.md, before:

# General information on `unsafe`

## *Unsafe* capacities

Language capabilities can be extended using unsafe code. The full list of these capacities is given in the [Rust reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/unsafety.html). Notice the following one's.

* Dereference a raw pointer
* Modify a static mutable variable
* Access to the fields of a `union`
* Declaring an `extern` block

These capabilities may be necessary for system programming but they cause the language to lose its [security properties](04_language.md#language-guarantees).

## `unsafe` keyword

The `unsafe` keyword is used both for API and implementation.

### `unsafe` in API

The use of this keyword in an API *warns* the API user against the potential harmful effects of the use of the API.

* In a function signature, `unsafe` means that the behavior of the function may lead to *UB*s if the use of the function does not comply with its interface contract (informally described in its documentation).
* In a trait definition, `unsafe` means that an erroneous implementation of this trait may lead to *UB*s.

### `unsafe` in implementation

Using this keyword in an implementation (a code block) is imposed by the compiler to prevent the inadvertent use of `unsafe` functions.

## Unsafe code

The combined use of the type system and the ownership system
enforces a high-level memory safety in Rust programs. This way, the language helps prevent memory overflows, null or invalid pointer constructions, and data
races.
To perform risky actions such as system calls, type coercions, or direct
manipulations of memory pointers, the language provides the `unsafe` keyword.

> **Rule {{#check LANG-UNSAFE | Don't use unsafe blocks}}**
>
> For a secured development, the `unsafe` blocks must be avoided. Afterward,
> we list the only cases where `unsafe` may be used, provided that they come
> with a proper justification:
>
>  - The Foreign Function Interface (FFI) of Rust allows for describing
>  functions whose implementations are written in C, using the `extern "C"`
>  prefix. To use such a function, the `unsafe` keyword is required. “Safe”
>  wrapper shall be defined to safely and seamlessly call C code.
>
>  - For embedded device programming, registers and various other resources are
>  often accessed through a fixed memory address. In this case, `unsafe` blocks
>  are required to initialize and dereference those particular pointers in Rust.
>  In order to minimize the number of unsafe accesses in the code and to allow
>  easier identification of them by a programmer, a proper abstraction (data
>  structure or module) shall be provided.
>
>  - A function can be marked unsafe globally (by prefixing its declaration with
>  the `unsafe` keyword) when it may exhibit unsafe behaviors based on its
>  arguments, that are unavoidable. For instance, this happens when a function
>  tries to dereference a pointer passed as an argument.
>
> With the exception of these cases, `#![forbid(unsafe_code)]` must appear in
> the crate root (typically `main.rs` or `lib.rs`) to generate compilation
> errors if `unsafe` is used in the code base.

## General warnings 

### Invariants and wrapping *unsafe*

Exposed APIs are responsible for preserving invariants to avoid bugs in general and, when handling `unsafe` code, *UB*s in particular.

The following code comes from the [Rustonomicon](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/working-with-unsafe.html).
It could be used to implement a custom `Vec` type.

```rust
use std::ptr;

pub struct Vec<T> {
    ptr: *mut T,
    len: usize,
    cap: usize,
}

// Note this implementation does not correctly handle zero-sized types.
impl<T> Vec<T> {
    pub fn push(&mut self, elem: T) {
        if self.len == self.cap {
            // not important for this example
            self.reallocate();
        }
        unsafe {
            ptr::write(self.ptr.add(self.len), elem);
            self.len += 1;
        }
    }
}
```

Soundness and safety of this code rely on the fact that bytes from address `self.ptr` to `self.ptr + self.cap * size_of<T>()` are allocated.

This invariant can be broken with *safe* code. For instance

```rust
fn make_room(&mut self) {
    // grow the capacity
    self.cap += 1;
}
```

This function my be necessary for internal use, but it should not be exposed in the API, or it should be marked with `unsafe` keyword, because its use can lead to *UB*.

### Trust relation between *safe* and *unsafe*

#### Principle

In Rust paradigm, 

> `unsafe`-free code cannot go wrong

which means it cannot result in *UB*.
This property is lost when the developers use *unsafe* code, that is why they are responsible of not producing *UB* in any scenario.
Consequently, even *safe* function must be handled carefully in *unsafe* context.

#### Example

Suppose one wants to propose an API find object of a given type in the memory.
This API could ask implementing the following trait

```rust
trait Locatable {
    /// Find object of type `Self` in the buffer `buf`.
    /// Returns the index of the first byte representing
    /// an object of type `Self`
    fn locate_instance_into(buf: &[u8]) -> Option<usize>;
}
```
This trait can be implemented **without** `unsafe`.

For instance, `bool` type can implement this trait as follows:

```rust
impl Locatable for bool {
    fn locate_instance_into(buf: &[u8]) -> Option<usize> {
        buf.iter().position(|u| *u == 0 || *u == 1)
    }
}
```

Moreover the function searching a `Locatable` type in the memory could be the following.

```rust
fn locate<T: Locatable + Clone>(start: *const u8, len: usize) -> Option<T> {
    let buf = unsafe { from_raw_parts(start, len) };
    match T::locate_instance_into(buf) {
        Some(begin) => unsafe {
            let start_T: *const T = start.byte_add(begin).cast();
            match start_T.as_ref() {
                None => None, // if start_T is null
                Some(r) => Some(r.clone()),
            }
        },
        None => None,
    }
}
```

<div class="warning">

This implementation is harmful for two reasons:

* If the `Locatable` implementation gives the wrong index, the `as_ref` function produce an *UB*.
* If the `Locatable` implementation gives an outbound index, the subsequent buffer overflow is an *UB*.

</div>

For instance, the following `Locatable` implementation is wrong **but** it is of the responsibility of the API maker to take it into account.

```rust
impl Locatable for bool {
    fn locate_instance_into(buf: &[u8]) -> Option<usize> {
        buf.iter().position(|u| *u == 0 || *u == 1).map(|n| n + 2)
    }
}
```

The following program produces *UB*.

```rust,should_panic
fn main() {
    let buf = [4, 1, 99];
    let start = buf.as_ptr();
    let located_bool: Option<bool> = locate(start, buf.len()); // UB here!
    println!("{:?}", located_bool)
}
```

The error can be shown with `valgrind`

```
$ valgrind ./target/release/rust-unsafe
==123651== Memcheck, a memory error detector
==123651== Copyright (C) 2002-2022, and GNU GPL'd, by Julian Seward et al.
==123651== Using Valgrind-3.19.0 and LibVEX; rerun with -h for copyright info
==123651== Command: ./target/release/rust-unsafe
==123651== 
==123651== valgrind: Unrecognised instruction at address 0x10f860.
==123651==    at 0x10F860: rust_unsafe::main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F842: std::sys::backtrace::__rust_begin_short_backtrace (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F838: std::rt::lang_start::{{closure}} (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x129F0F: std::rt::lang_start_internal (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F894: main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651== Your program just tried to execute an instruction that Valgrind
==123651== did not recognise.  There are two possible reasons for this.
==123651== 1. Your program has a bug and erroneously jumped to a non-code
==123651==    location.  If you are running Memcheck and you just saw a
==123651==    warning about a bad jump, it's probably your program's fault.
==123651== 2. The instruction is legitimate but Valgrind doesn't handle it,
==123651==    i.e. it's Valgrind's fault.  If you think this is the case or
==123651==    you are not sure, please let us know and we'll try to fix it.
==123651== Either way, Valgrind will now raise a SIGILL signal which will
==123651== probably kill your program.
==123651== 
==123651== Process terminating with default action of signal 4 (SIGILL)
==123651==  Illegal opcode at address 0x10F860
==123651==    at 0x10F860: rust_unsafe::main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F842: std::sys::backtrace::__rust_begin_short_backtrace (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F838: std::rt::lang_start::{{closure}} (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x129F0F: std::rt::lang_start_internal (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F894: main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651== 
==123651== HEAP SUMMARY:
==123651==     in use at exit: 0 bytes in 0 blocks
==123651==   total heap usage: 7 allocs, 7 frees, 2,072 bytes allocated
==123651== 
==123651== All heap blocks were freed -- no leaks are possible
==123651== 
==123651== For lists of detected and suppressed errors, rerun with: -s
==123651== ERROR SUMMARY: 0 errors from 0 contexts (suppressed: 0 from 0)
```

#### Conclusion

This example shows that developers using `unsafe` blocks 
cannot assume *safe* functions/traits they
use are well implemented, and thus must prevent *UB* 
in case these *safe* functions have bad behavior.

If they cannot protect their function against badly implemented *safe* functions/traits, they could either

* mark the function they *write* as `unsafe`: thus it is the user's responsibility to feed this function with correct arguments (by checking *unsafe* function documentation).
* mark the traits they *use* as `unsafe` : thus it is user's responsibility to simplement the trait properly (again reading the trait documentation).

#### Références

* https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/safe-unsafe-meaning.html

Commit message:

add unsafe encapsulation rule (LANG-UNSAFE-ENCP)

src/en/06_1_unsafe_generalities.md, after:

# General information on `unsafe`

## *Unsafe* capacities

Language capabilities can be extended using unsafe code. The full list of these capacities is given in the [Rust reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/unsafety.html). Notice the following one's.

* Dereference a raw pointer
* Modify a static mutable variable
* Access to the fields of a `union`
* Declaring an `extern` block

These capabilities may be necessary for system programming but they cause the language to lose its [security properties](04_language.md#language-guarantees).

## `unsafe` keyword

The `unsafe` keyword is used both for API and implementation.

### `unsafe` in API

The use of this keyword in an API *warns* the API user against the potential harmful effects of the use of the API.

* In a function signature, `unsafe` means that the behavior of the function may lead to *UB*s if the use of the function does not comply with its interface contract (informally described in its documentation).
* In a trait definition, `unsafe` means that an erroneous implementation of this trait may lead to *UB*s.

### `unsafe` in implementation

Using this keyword in an implementation (a code block) is imposed by the compiler to prevent the inadvertent use of `unsafe` functions.

## Unsafe code

The combined use of the type system and the ownership system
enforces a high-level memory safety in Rust programs. This way, the language helps prevent memory overflows, null or invalid pointer constructions, and data
races.
To perform risky actions such as system calls, type coercions, or direct
manipulations of memory pointers, the language provides the `unsafe` keyword.

> **Rule {{#check LANG-UNSAFE | Don't use unsafe blocks}}**
>
> For a secured development, the `unsafe` blocks must be avoided. Afterward,
> we list the only cases where `unsafe` may be used, provided that they come
> with a proper justification:
>
>  - The Foreign Function Interface (FFI) of Rust allows for describing
>  functions whose implementations are written in C, using the `extern "C"`
>  prefix. To use such a function, the `unsafe` keyword is required. “Safe”
>  wrapper shall be defined to safely and seamlessly call C code.
>
>  - For embedded device programming, registers and various other resources are
>  often accessed through a fixed memory address. In this case, `unsafe` blocks
>  are required to initialize and dereference those particular pointers in Rust.
>  In order to minimize the number of unsafe accesses in the code and to allow
>  easier identification of them by a programmer, a proper abstraction (data
>  structure or module) shall be provided.
>
>  - A function can be marked unsafe globally (by prefixing its declaration with
>  the `unsafe` keyword) when it may exhibit unsafe behaviors based on its
>  arguments, that are unavoidable. For instance, this happens when a function
>  tries to dereference a pointer passed as an argument.
>
> With the exception of these cases, `#![forbid(unsafe_code)]` must appear in
> the crate root (typically `main.rs` or `lib.rs`) to generate compilation
> errors if `unsafe` is used in the code base.

## General warnings 

### Invariants and wrapping *unsafe*

Exposed APIs are responsible for preserving invariants to avoid bugs in general and, when handling `unsafe` code, *UB*s in particular.

The following code comes from the [Rustonomicon](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/working-with-unsafe.html).
It could be used to implement a custom `Vec` type.

```rust
use std::ptr;

pub struct Vec<T> {
    ptr: *mut T,
    len: usize,
    cap: usize,
}

// Note this implementation does not correctly handle zero-sized types.
impl<T> Vec<T> {
    pub fn push(&mut self, elem: T) {
        if self.len == self.cap {
            // not important for this example
            self.reallocate();
        }
        unsafe {
            ptr::write(self.ptr.add(self.len), elem);
            self.len += 1;
        }
    }
}
```

Soundness and safety of this code rely on the fact that bytes from address `self.ptr` to `self.ptr + self.cap * size_of<T>()` are allocated.

This invariant can be broken with *safe* code. For instance

```rust
fn make_room(&mut self) {
    // grow the capacity
    self.cap += 1;
}
```

This function my be necessary for internal use, but it should not be exposed in the API, or it should be marked with `unsafe` keyword, because its use can lead to *UB*.

### Trust relation between *safe* and *unsafe*

#### Principle

In Rust paradigm, 

> `unsafe`-free code cannot go wrong

which means it cannot result in *UB*.
This property is lost when the developers use *unsafe* code, that is why they are responsible of not producing *UB* in any scenario.
Consequently, even *safe* function must be handled carefully in *unsafe* context.

#### Example

Suppose one wants to propose an API find object of a given type in the memory.
This API could ask implementing the following trait

```rust
trait Locatable {
    /// Find object of type `Self` in the buffer `buf`.
    /// Returns the index of the first byte representing
    /// an object of type `Self`
    fn locate_instance_into(buf: &[u8]) -> Option<usize>;
}
```
This trait can be implemented **without** `unsafe`.

For instance, `bool` type can implement this trait as follows:

```rust
impl Locatable for bool {
    fn locate_instance_into(buf: &[u8]) -> Option<usize> {
        buf.iter().position(|u| *u == 0 || *u == 1)
    }
}
```

Moreover the function searching a `Locatable` type in the memory could be the following.

```rust
fn locate<T: Locatable + Clone>(start: *const u8, len: usize) -> Option<T> {
    let buf = unsafe { from_raw_parts(start, len) };
    match T::locate_instance_into(buf) {
        Some(begin) => unsafe {
            let start_T: *const T = start.byte_add(begin).cast();
            match start_T.as_ref() {
                None => None, // if start_T is null
                Some(r) => Some(r.clone()),
            }
        },
        None => None,
    }
}
```

<div class="warning">

This implementation is harmful for two reasons:

* If the `Locatable` implementation gives the wrong index, the `as_ref` function produce an *UB*.
* If the `Locatable` implementation gives an outbound index, the subsequent buffer overflow is an *UB*.

</div>

For instance, the following `Locatable` implementation is wrong **but** it is of the responsibility of the API maker to take it into account.

```rust
impl Locatable for bool {
    fn locate_instance_into(buf: &[u8]) -> Option<usize> {
        buf.iter().position(|u| *u == 0 || *u == 1).map(|n| n + 2)
    }
}
```

The following program produces *UB*.

```rust,should_panic
fn main() {
    let buf = [4, 1, 99];
    let start = buf.as_ptr();
    let located_bool: Option<bool> = locate(start, buf.len()); // UB here!
    println!("{:?}", located_bool)
}
```

The error can be shown with `valgrind`

```
$ valgrind ./target/release/rust-unsafe
==123651== Memcheck, a memory error detector
==123651== Copyright (C) 2002-2022, and GNU GPL'd, by Julian Seward et al.
==123651== Using Valgrind-3.19.0 and LibVEX; rerun with -h for copyright info
==123651== Command: ./target/release/rust-unsafe
==123651== 
==123651== valgrind: Unrecognised instruction at address 0x10f860.
==123651==    at 0x10F860: rust_unsafe::main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F842: std::sys::backtrace::__rust_begin_short_backtrace (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F838: std::rt::lang_start::{{closure}} (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x129F0F: std::rt::lang_start_internal (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F894: main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651== Your program just tried to execute an instruction that Valgrind
==123651== did not recognise.  There are two possible reasons for this.
==123651== 1. Your program has a bug and erroneously jumped to a non-code
==123651==    location.  If you are running Memcheck and you just saw a
==123651==    warning about a bad jump, it's probably your program's fault.
==123651== 2. The instruction is legitimate but Valgrind doesn't handle it,
==123651==    i.e. it's Valgrind's fault.  If you think this is the case or
==123651==    you are not sure, please let us know and we'll try to fix it.
==123651== Either way, Valgrind will now raise a SIGILL signal which will
==123651== probably kill your program.
==123651== 
==123651== Process terminating with default action of signal 4 (SIGILL)
==123651==  Illegal opcode at address 0x10F860
==123651==    at 0x10F860: rust_unsafe::main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F842: std::sys::backtrace::__rust_begin_short_backtrace (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F838: std::rt::lang_start::{{closure}} (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x129F0F: std::rt::lang_start_internal (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651==    by 0x10F894: main (in /home/toto/src/rust-unsafe/target/release/rust-unsafe)
==123651== 
==123651== HEAP SUMMARY:
==123651==     in use at exit: 0 bytes in 0 blocks
==123651==   total heap usage: 7 allocs, 7 frees, 2,072 bytes allocated
==123651== 
==123651== All heap blocks were freed -- no leaks are possible
==123651== 
==123651== For lists of detected and suppressed errors, rerun with: -s
==123651== ERROR SUMMARY: 0 errors from 0 contexts (suppressed: 0 from 0)
```

#### Conclusion

This example shows that developers using `unsafe` blocks 
cannot assume *safe* functions/traits they
use are well implemented, and thus must prevent *UB* 
in case these *safe* functions have bad behavior.

If they cannot protect their function against badly implemented *safe* functions/traits, they could either

* mark the function they *write* as `unsafe`: thus it is the user's responsibility to feed this function with correct arguments (by checking *unsafe* function documentation).
* mark the traits they *use* as `unsafe` : thus it is user's responsibility to simplement the trait properly (again reading the trait documentation).

> **Rule {{#check LANG-UNSAFE-ENCP | Encapsulation of _unsafe_ features}}**
>
> In secure development of a Rust software component (crate or module), all
> _unsafe_ code must be encapsulated in such a way that:
>
> - either it exposes a safe behavior to the user, in which no safe interaction
>   can result in UB (undefined behavior);
> - or it exposes features marked as unsafe whose usage conditions
>   (preconditions, sequencing, etc.) are exhaustively documented.

Thus, a function using `unsafe` operations can be _safe_ if the `unsafe` operations do
not present any _UB_ (undefined behavior) given the component's invariants
(typically the type invariant for a method). Conversely, a function without an
`unsafe` block must be marked as `unsafe` if it breaks these invariants. The choice
and knowledge of these invariants are therefore crucial for secure
development.

#### Références

* https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/safe-unsafe-meaning.html
